[The Common Lisp Cookbook](index.html) - Interfacing with your OS
=================================================================

Contents
--------

-   [Accessing Environment Variables](#env)
-   [Accessing Command Line Arguments](#accessing-command-line)
-   [Forking with CMUCL](#fork-cmucl)

The ANSI Common Lisp standard doesn't mention this topic. (Keep in mind
that it was written at a time where [Lisp
Machines](http://kogs-www.informatik.uni-hamburg.de/~moeller/symbolics-info/symbolics.html)
were at their peak. On these boxes Lisp *was* your operating system!) So
almost everything that can be said here depends on your OS and your
implementation.

### Accessing Environment variables

Here's a function that'll allow you to look at Unix/Linux environment
variables on a lot of different CL implementations:

    * (defun my-getenv (name &optional default)
        #+CMU
        (let ((x (assoc name ext:*environment-list*
                        :test #'string=)))
          (if x (cdr x) default))
        #-CMU
        (or
         #+Allegro (sys:getenv name)
         #+CLISP (ext:getenv name)
         #+ECL (si:getenv name)
         #+SBCL (sb-unix::posix-getenv name)
         #+LISPWORKS (lispworks:environment-variable name)
         default))
    MY-GETENV
    * (my-getenv "HOME")
    "/home/edi"
    * (my-getenv "HOM")
    NIL
    * (my-getenv "HOM" "huh?")
    "huh?"

You should also note that some of these implementations also provide the
ability to *set* these variables. These include ECL (`SI:SETENV`) and
AllegroCL, LispWorks, and CLISP where you can use the functions from
above together with
[`SETF`](http://www.lispworks.com/documentation/HyperSpec/Body/m_setf_.htm).
This feature might be important if you want to start subprocesses from
your Lisp environment.

### Accessing the command line arguments

Accessing command line arguments is implementation-specific but it
appears most implementations have a way of getting at them.
[SBCL](http://www.sbcl.org) has the special variable `*posix-argv*`

     $ sbcl my-command-line-arg 

....

    * *posix-argv*

    ("sbcl" "my-command-line-arg")
    * 

More on using this to write standalone Lisp scripts can be found in the
[SBCL
Manual](http://www.sbcl.org/manual/Unix_002dstyle-Command-Line-Protocol.html)

[LispWorks](http://www.lispworks.com) has `system:*line-arguments-list*`

    CL-USER> system:*line-arguments-list*
    ("/Users/cbrown/Projects/lisptty/tty-lispworks" "-init" "/Users/cbrown/Desktop/lisp/lispworks-init.lisp")

[CMUCL](http://www.cons.org/cmucl/) has interesting extensions for
[manipulating the
arguments](http://common-lisp.net/project/cmucl/doc/cmu-user/unix.html)

Here's a quick function to return the argument strings list across
multiple implementations:

    (defun my-command-line ()
      (or 
       #+SBCL *posix-argv*  
       #+LISPWORKS system:*line-arguments-list*
       #+CMU extensions:*command-line-words*
       nil))

### Forking with CMUCL

Here's a function by Martin Cracauer that'll allow you to compile a
couple of files in parallel with [CMUCL](http://www.cons.org/cmucl/). It
demonstrates how to use the UNIX
[`fork`](http://www.freebsd.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=fork&apropos=0&sektion=0&manpath=FreeBSD+4.5-RELEASE&format=html)
system call with this CL implementation.

    (defparameter *sigchld* 0)

    (defparameter *compile-files-debug* 2)

    (defun sigchld-handler (p1 p2 p3)
      (when (> 0 *compile-files-debug*)
        (print (list "returned" p1 p2 p3))
        (force-output))
      (decf *sigchld*))

    (defun compile-files (files &key (load nil))
      (setq *sigchld* 0)
      (system:enable-interrupt unix:sigchld #'sigchld-handler)
      (do ((f files (cdr f)))
          ((not f))
        (format t "~&process ~d diving for ~a" (unix:unix-getpid)
            `(compile-file ,(car f)))
        (force-output)
        (let ((pid (unix:unix-fork)))
          (if (/= 0 pid)
          ;; parent
          (incf *sigchld*)
        ;; child
        (progn
          (compile-file (car f) :verbose nil :print nil)
          (unix:unix-exit 0)))))
      (do () ((= 0 *sigchld*))
        (sleep 1)
        (when (> 0 *compile-files-debug*)
          (format t "~&process ~d still waiting for ~d childs"
              (unix:unix-getpid) *sigchld*)))
      (when (> 0 *compile-files-debug*)
        (format t "~&finished"))
      (when load
        (do ((f files (cdr f)))
        ((not f))
          (load (compile-file-pathname (car f))))))

* * * * *

[Copyright](license.html) Â© 2002-2007 The Common Lisp Cookbook Project

http://cl-cookbook.sourceforge.net/

\
\$Header: /cvsroot/cl-cookbook/cl-cookbook/os.html,v 1.10 2007/01/28
10:14:10 skeptomai Exp \$

